Charts Familiarisation: Publications
Basic terms to help you communicate with your crew.

Books and publications
Nautical almanac
Personal logbooks
Ship's logbook
Pilot books
Chart 5011
Charts
Cruising guides
Tidal stream atlas
Items to take

***

The RYA Training Almanac
This almanac is included in your pack so have a look through it and see
what information it contains.
In general the almanac will provide specific information on ports, marinas, anchorages, VHF channels, facilities, navigation, waypoints, hazards, speed limits, sizes and types of berth available, charts needed for approach, entry, local by-laws and usually a small chart of the marina.

General information can include tide time and height predictions, tidal stream information, some of the chart symbols used in the course, passage making information and more.
You should familiarise yourself with all aspects of this book.


Some almanacs contain information on symbols and abbreviations
used on navigation charts.

***


Personal log books
Use these books to keep a record of all your trips, the name and type of vessel,
the total hours spent aboard including night hours, weather conditions, departure port, destination and all your certificates.

***


Ship's logbook
The ship's logbook should be updated with the vessel's time, date, course, speed,
log (miles travelled), position, weather and depth, at least once an hour or
if there is a course change.
Always keep your ship's log up to date.

The ships log is a legal document and can be used as evidence
in a court case should there be an accident at sea.

***

Pilot books
Contains detailed information on many of the smaller harbours and anchorages,
pilotage in and out of ports, marinas and estuaries.
Describes routes, headlands, landmarks, anchorages and currents.
Some include tidal flow information for the area.
The port information in some pilot books is not always up to date so they
should be used with care.

***

Chart NP 5011 or US chart 1
Symbols and abbreviations used on navigation charts.

This is an essential book for every vessel.
It provides detailed information on all symbols and abbreviations used on navigation charts.
Admiralty charts use NP 5011 Admiralty List of Symbols and Abbreviations.
Some other countries use Int 1 standard.
The USA uses Int 1 standard and their symbols' book is called 'Chart 1'.
US Chart 1 is freely available online as a PDF.

Symbol and abbreviations books are available from chart agents, the internet and chandlers.

***

Charts and chart catalogues
Chart catalogues contain information on which chart to buy for the area in which
you wish to sail.
There are a number of different chart providers, Imray and Admiralty are two major ones.
Charts are available as small desktop packs suitable for small chart tables or the normal
large Admiralty ones.


Charts and chart publications are available from all chart agencies and some chandlers.
Some charts have information on symbols and abbreviations on the back.

***

Cruising guides
Cruising guides give a wealth of information on places to visit,
marinas, restaurants, cafes, nice sailing areas,
local entertainment and are really useful if cruising on holiday.

***


Tidal stream atlas
Available from chart agents and chandlers.
This book gives hour by hour graphic information on the rate and direction of
tidal streams for specific areas.


***

Books and charts to take

An almanac, up to date charts for the passage and port entry, chart 5011, pilot book, tidal stream atlas (if not included in the almanac), and possibly a cruising guide.
