RYA Yachtmaster Offshore Exam
Full details of the exam syllabus and requirements are shown in the RYA Yachtmaster Scheme Syllabus and Logbook (G158) available from the RYA webshop. 

RYA Yachtmaster Offshore practical exams can be taken under sail or power and your certificate will be endorsed accordingly. Generally the vessel on which the exam will be taken is provided by the training centre that has conducted the preparatory training, with the training centre also arranging the examiner. Note: All qualifying sea time and passages must be gained on vessels appropriate to the type of exam i.e. gained in sailing vessels for a sail exam and power vessels for a power exam. 

There is no formal training course leading up to the exam, but whether you have previously undertaken RYA courses or not, most exam candidates find it extremely beneficial to undertake an exam “prep week” prior to examination.  Statistics from exam results clearly show a significantly higher pass rate from those who have undertaken RYA Training prior to the exam, regardless of any pre-existing experience. This training is tailor-made to your specific needs and helps to fill any gaps in your knowledge that may become apparent. 

The exam will include an assessment of your skippering skills, boat handling, general seamanship, navigation, safety awareness and knowledge of the IRPCS, meteorology and signals. Anything within the RYA Yachtmaster Scheme Syllabus and Logbook publication (G158) up to and including RYA Yachtmaster Offshore is within scope for the examination.  

RYA Yachtmaster Offshore exam pre-requisites:
Minimum seatime 

Documented minimum sea time(1) completed on a seagoing sailing or motor yacht (as appropriate) in the last 10 years: 

50 days at sea on yachts up to 500gt(2) which may be reduced to 25 days if the candidate already holds an RYA Yachtmaster Offshore Certificate of Competence(3) in another discipline.  

5 days as skipper on vessels less than 24m LOA, which may be reduced to 3 days if the candidate already holds an RYA Yachtmaster Offshore Certificate of Competence(3); 

2500 miles on yachts up to 500gt(2), which may be reduced to 1250 miles if the candidate already holds an RYA Yachtmaster Offshore Certificate of Competence(3); 

5 passages over 60 miles long, which must include 2 overnight passages and 2 as skipper, which may be reduced to 3 passages  including 1 overnight and 1 as skipper if the candidate already holds an RYA Yachtmaster Offshore Certificate of Competence(3). 

See: Information on qualifying passages 

(1)At least half the qualifying sea time should be gained in tidal waters and on vessels less than 24m LOA, and all seatime must be on vessels of the same discipline as the exam to be taken, i.e. sail or power. 

(2)Contact training@rya.org.uk if your sea time is on a yacht greater than 24m and 500gt. 

(3)For example, an RYA Yachtmaster Offshore Sail wishing to be examined for RYA Yachtmaster Offshore Power 

Form of exam 

Practical

Minimum exam duration

8-12 hours for 1 candidate, 10-18 hours for 2 candidates. No more than two candidates can be examined in 24 hours and no more than four candidates can be examined in a 2 day session

Minimum age 

18 at the time of the exam